A time zone is a region of the globe that observes a uniform standard time for legal, commercial, and social purposes. Time zones tend to follow the boundaries of countries and their subdivisions because it is convenient for areas in close commercial or other communication to keep the same time. A display of standard time may be based on either mean solar time, as shown by clocks and watches generally, or Coordinated Universal Time, which is displayed by radio-controlled clocks. The difference between the two timescales is not permitted to exceed 0.9 second - where necessary a leap second will be inserted into coordinated universal time to ensure this limit is maintained.

National laws specify whether the legal time for general purposes is based on Greenwich Mean Time (which is mean solar time at zero longitude) or coordinated universal time, and the zone offset (if any) to be applied. The legal time is paramount.[1] Both GMT and UTC may be referred to as "Zulu time". Most of the time zones on land are offset from Zulu time by a whole number of hours (−12 to +14), but a few zones are offset by 30 or 45 minutes (for example Newfoundland Standard Time is GMT−03:30, Nepal Standard Time is GMT+05:45, and Indian Standard Time is GMT+05:30). The European Union employs Greenwich Mean Time in its directives.[2] Some higher latitude and temperate zone countries use daylight saving time for part of the year, typically by adjusting local clock time by an hour. Many land time zones are skewed toward the west of the corresponding nautical time zones. This also creates a permanent daylight saving time effect.

Before clocks were first invented, it was common practice to mark the time of day with apparent solar time (also called "true" solar time) – for example, the time on a sundial – which was typically different for every location and dependent on longitude.

When well-regulated mechanical clocks became widespread in the early 19th century,[3] each city began to use some local mean solar time. Apparent and mean solar time can differ by up to around 15 minutes (as described by the equation of time) because of the elliptical shape of the Earth's orbit around the Sun (eccentricity) and the tilt of the Earth's axis (obliquity). Mean solar time has days of equal length, and the difference between the two sums to zero after a year.

Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) was established in 1675, when the Royal Observatory was built, as an aid to mariners to determine longitude at sea, providing a standard reference time while each city in England kept a different local time.

Local solar time became increasingly inconvenient as rail transport and telecommunications improved, because clocks differed between places by amounts corresponding to the differences in their geographical longitudes, which varied by four minutes of time for every degree of longitude. For example, Bristol is about 2.5 degrees west of Greenwich (east London), so when it is solar noon in Bristol, it is about 10 minutes past solar noon in London.[4] The use of time zones accumulates these differences into longer units, usually hours, so that nearby places can share a common standard for timekeeping.

The first adoption of a standard time was on December 1, 1847, in Great Britain by railway companies using GMT kept by portable chronometers. The first of these companies to adopt standard time was the Great Western Railway (GWR) in November 1840. This quickly became known as Railway Time. About August 23, 1852, time signals were first transmitted by telegraph from the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. Even though 98% of Great Britain's public clocks were using GMT by 1855, it was not made Britain's legal time until August 2, 1880. Some British clocks from this period have two minute hands—one for the local time, one for GMT.[5]

Improvements in worldwide communication further increased the need for interacting parties to communicate mutually comprehensible time references to one another. The problem of differing local times could be solved across larger areas by synchronizing clocks worldwide, but in many places that adopted time would then differ markedly from the solar time to which people were accustomed.
